A framework for building GUIs in applications designed for Apple's various platforms. It provides a wide range of tools and components to craete user interfaces for applications.

- Provides a library of classes that represents different kinds of views.
- Want to create a label? -> UILabel. A Button? -> UIButton
- to modify these views, you would need to modify its properties.
## UIView
- An object that manages the content for a rectangular area on the screen. The `UIView` class defines the behaviors that are common to all views. 
- All following UI elements are a subclass of UIView
```swift
let view = UIView()
```

### All UIViews share following attributes:
- `.alpha`: the alpha value of the view
- `.backgroundColor`: the background color of the view
- `.bounds`: the view's bounded rectangle that describes the view's location and size relative to its own coordinate system.
- `.clipsToBounds`: a boolean value determine if the view's subviews are constrained by the bounds of the view
- `.frame`: the view's frame rectangle that describes the view's location and size relative to its superview's coordinate system
- `.isHidden`
- `.layer.cornerRadius`: the radius utilized to round the corners of any view. 
- `.layer.borderColor`: you must use the CGColor equivalent as follows: `UIColor.black.cgColor`
- `.layer.borderWidth`
- `.layer.opacity`: value is a floating point number 0..1
## Text-Based Views
The following views are utilized for displaying text in your views.
- `.font`
- `.text`
- `.textAlignment`
- `.textColor`

## UILabel
- A view that displays one or more lines of information text. 
- Most commonly used to display titles, headers, or short lines of text that are NOT scrollable
```swift
let label = UILabel()
```
- unique attributes: `.numberOfLines`

## UITextField
- An object that displays an editable text area in your interface. 
- Most commonly used to obtain shorter text input from users
- the textField area is NOT scrollable nor multiline
```swift
let textField = UITextField()
```

### Unique attributes
- `.borderstyle`: specify the basic border style of the textField
- `.delegate`: used to keep track of and manage user interaction with the textField
- `keyboardType`: specify the type of keyboard that the textField pulls up when interacted with
- `.placeholder`: the text string that display when there's no other text in textField.

## UITextView
A scrollable, multiline text region.
``` swift
let textView = UITextView()
```

### Unique attributes
- `.delegate`: used to keep track of and manage user interaction with the textView
- `isEditable`: a boolean value indicating whether the textView can be edited
- `isScrollable`: a boolean value indicating whether the textView is scrollable
- `isSelectable`: a boolean value indicating whether the textView is selectable

