## C Memory Model
### Memory array
- When we are programming, we like to imagine memory as a single, vast array that houses all of our data. 
- This memory array is divided into segments, each segment stores one particular type of data.

| Buffer |
|--------|
| Code |
| Global Data |
| Heap |
| Stack |
| OS |

### Code 
-  When we want to write a program in C.  Once the program is compiled into machine instructions, the code is stored near the top of our array in the code segment.
- Though the array starts at 0, the code segment would be very close to, but not at 0.

### Stack
- As the code executes, each function invocation is allocated space in the stack to store local variables.
- LIFO: the most recent function call is at the top of the stack, and that function calls are removed in last-in-first-out order.
- stack frame: 
	- when a method is called, a stack frame would be pushed onto the top of the stack
	- Once the function is finished executing, we will pop that function stack frame from the stack and return a value to our caller, main.
	- the top frame in the stack is always for the function that is currently being executed

### Global Data
- If we assign a variable outside of main, then it is a global variable that exists everywhere.
- We cannot store global var into the stack to avoid being defined for a certain function.
- So global variables are stored in their own global data segment below the code segment.
- not just hold global values; also holds some values such as string literals.


### Heap
- all dynamically allocated data is stored right below the global segment in an area called heap.
- when we free an allocated piece of memory, it is marked as being available for allocation
- ENOMEM
	- As stack growing up and heap growing down, both have a max size
	- so if your program exceeds the maximum size of the stack of heap, your program will encounter an out of memory error, or ENOMEM

### OS
- The OS reserves the largest addresses in memory.
- These OS segments cannot be accessed by normal programs. If try to address OS memory, you will get Segmentation Fault.

### Buffer
- A segmentation fault results when we try to access something we don't have access to or something that does not exit
- One of the most common problems is an uninitialized variable or pointer, which results to it pointing to the zero, resulting in a segfault. 
- As a result, zero and anything close to zero is used as a buffer for failure.


## Dynamic Memory
### malloc and heap
We shouldn't access variables allocated on the stack after they have been deallocated.
To allocated memory in a function and have that memory accessible after the function returns, we  use `malloc` and heap.
- heap:
	- a portion of memory where we can allocate space for variables that have to last beyond the return statement of the function in which they were declared.
	- Heap memory remains available until the programmer explicitly deallocates it.

	```C
	void *malloc(size_t size);
	```
- `malloc`: allocate memory on the heap.
- `size_t size`: 
	- the size parameter indicates how many bytes of memory should be allocated.
	- its type `size_t` is a type defined by the standard library as the type returned by sizeof. In general, `siez_t` is an unsigned int.
- `void *`: 
	- the return type is a pointer. It holds the address of the memory allocated by malloc on the heap.
	- a void pointer is used to return a pointer of generic type. malloc returns a void pointer because it doesn't know how the memory being allocated is going to be used.
- example
```C
int *i_pt = malloc(sizeof(int));
```

### Freeing Dynamically Allocated Memory
- memory leak
	- A memory leak is when you allocate memory on the heap, but do not free it
	- program will encounter an out-of-memory error(ENOMEM) if memory leak continues to occur.
```C
void free(void *ptr);
```
- free: deallocate memory on the heap
	- `void *ptr`: a pointer to the beginning of a block of memory that had been previously returned by a call to malloc
	- returns that address to the system managing the memory for program to be reallocated for another purpose
- example
	```C
	int *pt = malloc(sizeof(int));
	free(pt);
	```
- dangling pointer
	- A pointer that points to memory that has already been freed
	- not safe
- memory left allocated on the heap at the end of a running program is automatically deallocated. 

### return an address with a pointer
- a common mistake
```C
void helper(int *arr) {
   arr = malloc(sizeof(int)*3)
   arr[0] = 18;
   arr[1] = 21;
   arr[2] = 23;
}

int main() {
    int *data;
    helper(data);
    printf("the middle value: %d\n", data[1]);
    return 0;
}
```
```shell
> gcc param.c
> ./a.out
> middle value: 0
```
`arr` is a local variable on the stack of the helper function. When we modify `arr`, we're modifying the local variable, not the variable data from main.

- we want to change the pointer data
```C
void helper(int **arr_matey) {
   *arr_matey = malloc(sizeof(int) * 3);

/*
for convenience, we don't have to dereference parameter everywhere, we create a local variable arr_matey to store a reference to the array
*/
   int *arr = *arr_matey;
   arr[0] = 18;
   arr[1] = 21;
   arr[2] = 23;
}

int main() {
    int *data;
    helper(&data);
    
    printf("the middle value: %d\n", data[1]);
    free(data); /*we should free the memory as soon as we are finished using it.*/
    return 0;
}
```

- another common mistake
	we create a local variable, and that local variable gets the return value of malloc  rather than data itself.
```C
void helper(int **arr_matey) {
   int *arr = *arr_matey;
   *arr_matey = malloc(sizeof(int) * 3);

   arr[0] = 18;
   arr[1] = 21;
   arr[2] = 23;
}
```
```shell
> gcc param.c
> ./a.out
> middle value: 0
```
### Nested data structure
- If we don't know the sizes of an array at compile time, we have to use dynamic memory rather than statically-defined arrays.
```C
int **pointers = malloc(sizeof(int*) * 2);

pointers[0] = malloc(sizeof(int));
pointers[1] = malloc(sizeof(int) * 3);

/*
*pointers[0] = 55 // dereferencing
*/
pointers[0][0] = 55;
pointers[1][2] = 300;

free(pointers[0]);
free(pointers[1]);
free(pointers);
```