## argc and argv in C

C uses a mechanism which you will find reminiscent of java's command-line-argument mechanism (the "String []args" argument to main()).  There is an alternate allowable definition of main() in C and C++, whose declaration looks like this:

```c
int main(int argc, char **argv)
```

"argc" stands for "argument count".  It is the number of elements in "argv", "argument vector". (While "vector" and "array" mean different things in java's datatype library, in general they are synonyms.)

While "argc" and "argv" are theoretically arbitrary parameter names, the use of the names "argc" and "argv" is *so* standard that you should *never* use any other name.

Since a string can be passed around as a value of type pointer-to-char, argv will be an array of pointers-to-char.  And when argv is passed to main() by the operating system, it will decay into a pointer to its zeroth element, so the data will be of type pointer-to-pointer-to-char.

The array is one element larger than you might think.  The program name itself is argv[0], so the first command-line argument is argv[1], and so on, and argc reflects the total number of items in the argv array *including* this argv[0]. Often we ignore argv[0] altogether.

**Example 1:**  
Write a program which first checks that argc is at least 2, then prints the value of argv[1] (using %s).  A session with this program might look like this, where '$' is your shell prompt:

```shell
$ ./a.out hello, world
hello,
$ 
```

Since "world" is argv[2], it didn't print that part.  The shell (command interpreter) divides up the arguments based on spaces.

Solution:

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
    if (argc >= 2)
        printf("%s\n", argv[1]);
    return(0);
}
```

We check that argc >= 2 before accessing argv[1], because it is illegal to exceed the bounds of an array in C, and it is **undiagnosed**... be careful!

**Example 2:**  
Write a program which prints all of the argv values in a loop.  This is like the 'echo' command in unix.

Sample session (our program is not going to be quite as tidy as 'echo', as shown here):

```shell
$ echo hello, world, how are you
hello, world, how are you
$ ./a.out hello, world, how are you
hello,
world,
how
are
you
$ 
```

Answer:

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
    int i;
    for (i = 1; i < argc; i++)
        printf("%s\n", argv[i]);
    return(0);
}
```

Note the ignoring of argv[0], which would be "./a.out".

**Example 3:**  
Finally, here is a more traditionally-written unix "echo" command (although not implementing the "−n" option processing). Understanding this code requires understanding the C pointers material (not just arrays), and also the C [comma operator](The%20C%20comma%20operator.md).

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
    for (argc--, argv++; argc > 0; argc--, argv++)
        printf("%s%c", *argv, (argc == 1) ? '\n' : ' ');
    return(0);
}
```

I suggest spending the necessary time to understand how all of that works (possibly by asking me about it). (But only after learning the C pointers material.)

## Convert String to Integer

Using `strtol`
``` C
long int strtol(const char *str, char **endptr, int base);
```
- `strtol`: convert string to long.
- `const char* str`: the first parameter is the string that we want to convert.
- `int base`: the base of the number system that we want to use to interpret the string we are converting
- it can handle leading spaces and a leading plus or minus sign
- `char **endptr`:
	- Suppose our string begins with an integer but then the digits are followed by other non-numeric characters. strtol still extracts the integer correctly and it uses the middle parameter to tell the caller where the "leftover" piece of the string starts. 
	- Notice that the second parameter is of type pointer to pointer to char. That's the address of a pointer to char. If instead of NULL, we pass in the address of a pointer to char, strtol sets that pointer to point to the first character of the "leftover" -- or "unconverted" -- part of the first parameter.
	- e.g.
	```C
	#include <stdio.h>
	#include <stdlib.h>

	int main() {
    //char *s = "17";
    char *s = "  -17";
    int i = strtol(s, NULL, 10);

    printf("i has the value %d\n", i);


    s = "  -17 other junk.";
    char *leftover;
    i = strtol(s, &leftover, 10);

    printf("i has the value %d\n", i);
    printf("leftover has the value %s\n", leftover);
    return 0;
	}
	```
	- output:
```shell
> gcc -Wall strtol1.c
> ./a.out
> i has the value -17
> leftover has the value  other junk.
```
