## 1. Typedef

allows you to create aliases for types and is evaluated by the compiler.

- Operation

```C
typedef <Original Type>  (<Rename the Original Type>)
```

- Example
```C
typedef unsigned int size_t;
```
Rename `unsiged int` to size_t

- we always use `typedef` to help rename the struct type


## 2.  Macros

lets you define keywords that are replaced by specified strings when your program is processed *before* being compiled.

- `#define identifier replacement-list` 
	-  a macro starts with a pound define.
	- A macro is evaluated during pre-processing -- just like #include statements.
	- example: `#define MAX_NAME_LENGTH 40`
	- By very strong convention, all defined macros are capitalized.
- the macro language isn't C. You don't need an equals sign, or a semi-colon.
- macros can take parameters
	```macro
	#define TAX_RATE .80
	#define WITH_TAX(x) ((x) * 1.08)
	```
	```C
	int main() {
		double purchase = 9.99;
		printf("%f\n", WITH_TAX(purchase)); // printf("%f\n", ((purchase) * 1.08));
		return 0;
	}
	```

- Note:
	1. you can't have any space between the macro name and the opening parenthesis. 
	2. you should place the parameter name (in our case x) and the entire definition in parenthesis.

## 3. C preprocessor
Any line that starts with a # symbol contains a preprocessor directive. Preprocessor directives are used to modify the C source code before it is compiled.

- The preprocessor could includes several predefined macros.
- Macros are allowed to expand within other macros
### `cpp` command
cpp is a macro processor that is used automatically by the C compile to transform your program before compilation.
- example: 
	- `cpp ex1.c` 
	- executes the preprocessor on the file ex1.c.
### system defined macros
- surrounded by double underscores, a convention that identifies them as system defined.
- example
	```C
	#include <stdio.h>
	int main(){
		printf("Line %d: %s compiled on %s at %s.\n", __LINE__, __FILE__, __DATA__, __TIME__);
		return 0;
	}
	```

- some macros are defined by specific systems
	```C
	#include <stdio.h>
	int main() {
	  printf("Compiled on linux? %d\n", __gnu_linux__);
	  printf("Compiled on OS X? %d\n", __APPLE__);
	  return 0;
	}
	```
- hence, we need a conditional statement
		1. `#if`: checks for the value of the symbol.
		2. `#ifdef`: checks the existence of the symbol regardless of its value
- Note: Since the macro language doesn't use curly braces, each block in the sequence of conditionals needs to be terminated by another directive.
- example
```C
#include <stdio.h>

// if version

#if __APPLE__
const char OS_STR[] = "OS/X";
#elif __gnu_linux__
const char OS_STR[] = "gnu/linux";
#else
const char OS_STR[] = "unknown";
#endif


// ifdef version

#ifdef __APPLE__
const char OS_STR[] = "OS/X";
#elif defined(__gnu_linux__)
const char OS_STR[] = "gnu/linux";
#else
const char OS_STR[] = "unknown";
#endif

int main() {
  printf("Compiled on %s\n", OS_STR);
  return 0;
}
```

- `gcc -D: macro[=defn]`
- By default, the macro is defined with value 1
```C
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {

  #ifdef DEBUG
  printf("Running in debug mode at level %d\n", DEBUG);
  #endif

  return 0;
}
```
```shell
>gcc -D DEBUG ex6.c
>./a.out
Running in debug mode at level 1
>gcc -D DEBUG=3 ex6.c
Running in debug mode at level 3
```
### C preprocessor in compiler toolchain
Recall Compiler toolchain, `#include "sorts.h"`. The contents of the header file, sorts.h, were copied into the source file by C preprocessor.

## Function like Macros


