## Introduction
### Definition and terminology
1. Program: A program is the code, either the human-readable source code, or the compiled machine level code.
2. Process: a running instance of a program
	- A process includes the machine code of the program
	-  plus information about the current state of process such as what instruction to execute next, or the current values of variables in memory.

### Process
- Each process has a unique identifier, or process ID.
- Each process is also associated with a data structure called a process control block (PCB) -- or task control block
	- stores the current values of important registers, any open file descriptors, and other state that the operating system manages. 
	- The registers stored include the stack pointer, which identifies the top of the stack, and the program counter, which identifies the next instruction to be executed.
- `top`: display sorted information about processes
- The number of active processes is much larger than the number of processes executing instructions at a particular instant of time.  The number of processors (CPU) on the computer determines how many processes can be executing an instruction at the same time.
- three state
	- running state
	- ready state: processes that could be executing if a CPU were available. 
	- blocked state (sleeping state)


## Creating Processes with fork

Creating a new process requires a system call because the operating system must set up data structures such as process control block, needed by the new process.

### fork
- creates a new process by duplicating the calling process.
- To duplicate a process
	- the operating system copies the original process's address space: its data, and the process control block that keeps track of the current state of the process.
	- As a result, the newly created process is running the same code, has the same values for all variables in memory, and has the same value for program counter and stack pointer. 
- differences
	- The newly created process gets a different process id (PID)
	- the return value of fork in the parent process is the process id of the child. The return value of fork in the child process is 0.
- we don't know whether the parent process or the child process will execute first
- if fork fails, then the return value of fork in the parent is -1 and the new process is not created
	- fork might fail if there are already too many running processes for the user or across the whole system

example
```C
// parent process pid == 617
int main(){
	int i;
	pid_t result;

	i = 5;
	printf("%d\n",i);

	result = fork();
	/* result = 680, since pid of child process == 680 */
	if (result > 0) 
		i = i + 2;
	else if (result == 0)
		i = i - 2;
	else
		perror("fork"); 
	printf("%d\n", i);
	return 0;
}
```
- notice is that the parent and child processes are now completely separate processes and don't share memory.

- `getpid, getppid` - get parent or calling process identification
- `usleep`
	- to slow the processes down enough to see what can happen when they run concurrently
	- introduce more variability in how the processes run because every time `usleep` is called, control is passed to the operating system, which gives the operating system the opportunity to make a scheduling decision -- to decide which process will run next.

## wait

### wait
the shell uses the wait system call to suspend itself until its child terminates.
```C
pid_t wait(int *stat_loc);
```
- if wait returns successfully, it returns the process id of the child that terminated. If wait fails, it returns -1.  
```C
// The information in the status argument is only useful if the system call succeeded, so we must check wait's return value before using it.
result = fork();
if (result == -1) {
	perror("fork:");
	exit(1); 
} else if (result == 0) {
}
```

### exit
- The status isn't just the argument to the exit function. Various bits in the status argument are divided up and used for different purposes.
- In particular, the lowest 8 bits tell us whether the child process terminated normally, or whether it terminated because it received a signal (like control C). If it terminated due to a signal, the lower 8 bits tell us which signal.

### macros
1. `WIFEITED`: check if the process terminated normally.
2. If it did, then we use `WEXITSTATUS` to extract the exit value of the process
3. Otherwise, if a process exits as a result of a signal, then we use `WIFSIGNALED` and `WTERMSIG` to find out the number of signal that caused the process to terminate.

### example 
```C
if (WIFEXITED(status)) {
    printf("Child %d terminated with %d\n", pid, WEXITSTATUS(status));
} else if(WIFSIGNALED(status)){
    printf("Child %d terminated with signal %d\n", pid, WTERMSIG(status));
} else {
    printf("Shouldn't get here\n");
}
```

### waitpid
- If we need a bit more control, the `waitpid` system call lets you specify which child process to wait for. To do so, you pass in the process id of a child process.
- you can pass in the `WNOHANG`option to `waitpid` if the parent process just wants to check if a child has terminated but doesn't want to block.

### limitation
- they only wait for child processes. You cannot wait for an unrelated process or even a child of a child process. 

## zombies and orphans

**Question**: happens when a child process terminates before the parent calls wait
### zombie
- a zombie process is a process that is dead, but is still hanging around for the parent to collect its termination status

**Question**: what happens if the parent never calls wait? Why don't we have dozens or hundreds of zombie processes using up the process table?

1. a zombie is exorcised(put to rest) when its termination status has been collected. 
2. the main task of the init process is to call wait in a loop, which collects the termination status of any process that it has adopted
3. after init has collected the termination status of an orphaned process, all of the process's data structure can be deleted, and the zombie disappears
### orphan
- we call the child process an orphan when its parent terminates first
- init process:
	- the process with process id 1
	- the first process that the operating system launches
- when a process becomes an orphan, it is adopted by the init process 

### example
```C
#include <stdio.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <stdlib.h>

int main() {
    int result;
    int i, j;

    printf("[%d] Original process (my parent is %d)\n",
            getpid(), getppid());

    for(i = 0; i < 5; i++) {
        result = fork();

        if(result == -1) {
            perror("fork:");
            exit(1);
        } else if (result == 0) { //child process
            for(j = 0; j < 5; j++) {
                printf("[%d] Child %d %d (parent pid = %d)\n",
                        getpid(), i, j, getppid());
                usleep(100);
            }
            exit(0);
        }
    }
    printf("[%d] Parent about to terminate\n", getpid());
    return 0;

}
````

## exec
### exec
Linux provides the "exec" family of functions to replace the currently running process with a different executable. 

1. `execl`
	 - the first argument to `execl` is the path to an executable
	 - the remaining arguments to `execl` are the command line arguments to the executable named in the first argument
	 - if we don't have any command line arguments, `execl` requires we include NULL as the final argument
	 - when control returns to the user level process, the original code that called exec is gone, so it should never return
	 - exec does not create a new process, exec ask the os to modify the calling process. Thus, the process has the same pid after exec.
	 - example
```C
int main(){
	printf("About to call execl. My PID is %d\n", getpid());
	execl("./hello", NULL);
	perror("exec");
	return 1;
}
```
```shell
>./do_exec
About to call execl. My PID is 17170
Hello. My pID is 17170
```

2. exec family
```C
int execl(const char *path, const char *arg, ...);
int execlp(const char *file, const char *arg, ...);
int execle(const char *path, const char *arg, ..., char * const envp[]);
```
- l stands for list, so the command line arguments to the program are passes as a list of arguments to the exec function
```C
int execv(const char *path, char *const argv[]);
int execvp(const char *file, char *const argv[]);
int execvpe(const char *file, char *const argv[], char *const envp[]);
```
- v stands for vector, so the command line arguments are passed in as an array of strings, just as we see with argv parameter of main
- p stands for path, which means that the  PATH environment variable is searched to find the executable
- without p, `execl` and `execv` expect that the first argument is a full path to the executable
- e stands for environment, you can pass in an array of environment variables and their values so that the program executes within a specific environment

### shell: how we run different programs
- the shell is just a process, and it uses fork and exec
- When you type a command at a shell prompt, the shell first calls fork to create a new process, and then the child process calls exec to load a different program into the memory of the child process.
- Typically, the shell process then calls wait, and blocks until the child process finishes executing. When the wait call returns, it prints a prompt indicating it is ready to receive the next command.




