## Unbuffered I/O

`strace` trace system calls and signals
### file descriptor
- an non-negative integer that represents an open file, or open communication channel
- file descriptors are of type int because os use them as indexes into a table of open files
- file descriptor is one field in a FILE struct
- standard file descriptors
	- 0: standard input
	- 1: standard output
	- 2: standard error

- `int fileno(FILE *stream);`
	returns file descriptor on success, or -1 on error
- `int open(const char *pathname, int flags)`
	- open system call return file descriptor on success, or -1 on error
	- flags argument is a bit mask that specifies the access mode for the file
		- `O_RDONLY`: Open the file for reading only
		- `O_WRONLY`: Open the file for writing only
		- `O_RDWR`: Open the file for both reading and writing
- `ssize_t read(int fd, void *buffer, size_t count);`
	- Returns number of bytes read, 0 on EOF, or -1 on error


## Pipe
- Pipes are one type of communication mechanism that can be used to send data between related processes.
-  A pipe is specified by an array of two file descriptors, the first element of the array `fd[0]` is always for ***reading data*** from the pipe, and second one `fd[1]` is for ***writing data*** to the pipe.
- `int pipe(int fd[2]);`: returns 0 on success, or -1 on error

- pipes are uni-directional: one process will write to the pipe and another process will read from the pipe.
- example: child will read data from the parent
```C
int main(){
	int fd[2];

	if (pipe(fd) == -1){
		perror("pipe");
		exit(1);
	}
	int r = fork();

	if (r > 0) // parent process
		close(fd[0]); // close the read file descriptor
	else if (r == 0) // child process
		close(fd[1]); // close the write file descriptor
}
```

- Note
	- we need to close the write file descriptor for the pipe.
	- Since when all the write file descriptors on the pipe are closed, a read on the pipe will return 0 indicating that there is no more data to read from the pipe. 
	- The child process uses this to detect when the parent is finished writing lines to the pipe.




## Concurrency and Pipes
Producer Consumer Problem:
we consider writing data as producer, reading data as consumer, then:
1. producer adds to the queue when it is full
2. consumer removes from the queue when it is empty
3. producer and consumer operate on queue simultaneously

we do not worry about them:
1. the operating system will cause a write to the pipe to block until there is space in the pipe
2. the operating system will cause a read call blocked if the pipe is empty
3.  the operating system ensures that only one process is modifying it at a time. This eliminates the case where a consumer removes data as a producer is writing it.




## Redirecting input and output with dup2

### `|` 

the pipe operator use the output of `grep` as the input to the `wc` program
```sh
> grep L0101 student_list.txt | wc
```

### dup2
```C
int dup2(int oldfd, int newfd);
```
- returns (new) file descriptor on success, or -1 on error
- this system call makes `newfd` be the copy of  an open file descriptor `oldfd`

### file descriptor table
- each process has its own set of file descriptors, this mean each process has its own file descriptor table.
- This table is stored in the "process control block" (PCB) and contains pointers to data structures that contain information about open files.
	- for example, the 0 index into the file descriptor table usually contains a link to the console.

### redirect
For the shell to execute a redirect program, 
1. it first needs to call fork to create a new process. 
2. When a child process is created, it obtains a copy of the file descriptor table from its parent.
	- Note:
		- even though the file descriptor tables are separate, the pointers in them may point to the same object.
		- since file objects are shared. Change to the file will be observed by both process
3. Later, when the child runs, it opens the file that will receive the output of the program.
	- Note: we've opened the file with write permissions, so it can receive output.
4. Now we can redirect standard output using `dup2(filefd, fileno(stdout));`, 
	1. where `fileno(stdout)` extract the file descriptor for `stdout` . 
	2. After the `dup2` call, file descriptor points to the newly opened file, rather than the console.
	3. Now when the process writes to stdout the output will be written to the file, rather than the console.
	4. Note: it's a good idea to close the file descriptors that we are not using
5. the child process calls exec, all the file descriptors that were open before the exec call are retained,