## 1. Definition
 - Signals are a mechanism that allows a process or the operating system to interrupt a currently running process and notify it that an event has occurred.
- Each signal is identified by a number between 1 and 31, and defined constants are used to give them names
-  Each signal is associated with a default action
### Example
1. When we type control C the terminal sends the SIGINT signal to the process and the default action is for the process to terminate.
2. When we type control Z, the terminal sends the SIGSTOP signal to the process and the default action is for the process to suspend execution.

### kill
- we using a library function `kill` or from the command line using a program called `kill` to send arbitrary signals to a process.

#### 1. kill program
```sh
> ps aux | grep dots
> kill -STOP 3819
> kill -CONT 3819
> kill -INT 3819
```
- we use `ps` to know process id
- use `kill` to send `SIGSTOP`, the program has stopped running, just like type Ctrl + Z
- if I want to get the programming running again, I can send it the `SIGCONT` signal
- I can make the process terminate by sending it a `SIGINT` signal, that's the signal we sent when we pressed Ctrl + C

#### 2. kill library function
- The library function kill provides the same functionality as the kill program
- you would need to know the pid of the process that you are signalling.
	- In most cases, we use signals to send messages to our children, so we can get the pid from the return value of fork.
	 - A child process could get the process id of its parent with `getppid`.


## 2. Signal Handling

### signal table
- the process control block(PCB) contains a signal table which is similar to the open file table
- Each entry in the signal table contains a pointer to code that will be executed when the operating system delivers the signal to the process. This is called the signal handling function.
- We can change the behaviour of a signal by installing a new signal handling function.  
### signal handling function
``` C
#include <signal.h>
int sigaction(int signum, const struct sigaction *act, struct sigaction *oldact);
```
- the `sigaction()` system call is use to change the action taken by a process on the receipt of a specific signal
- The first argument `signum` is the number of the signal that we are going to modify.
- The second argument is a pointer to struct that we need to initialise before we call `sigaction`.
- The third argument is also a pointer to a struct, but in this case the system call fills in the values of the struct with the current state of the signal handler before we change it.

### struct `sigaction` 

```C
struct sigaction {
	void (*sa_handler)(int);
	void (*sa_sigaction)(int, siginfo_t *, void *);
	sigset_t sa_mask;
	int sa_flags;
	void (*sa_restorer)(void);
};
```
- The first field of the `sigaction` struct is the function pointer for the signal handler function that we want to install.

#### Note
there are two signals that you can't change: `SIGKILL` and `SIGSTOP`
- `SIGKILL` will always cause the process to terminate
- `SIGSTOP` will always suspend the process


### example 
```C
#include <stdio.h>
#include <signal.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <unistd.h>

/* A signal handling function that simply prints
   a message to standard error. */
void handler(int code) {
    fprintf(stderr, "Signal %d caught\n", code);
}

int main() {
    // Declare a struct to be used by the sigaction function:
    struct sigaction newact;

    // Specify that we want the handler function to handle the
    // signal:
    newact.sa_handler = handler;

    // Use default flags:
    newact.sa_flags = 0;

    // Specify that we don't want any signals to be blocked during
    // execution of handler:
    sigemptyset(&newact.sa_mask);

    // Modify the signal table so that handler is called when
    // signal SIGINT is received:
    sigaction(SIGINT, &newact, NULL);

    // Keep the program executing long enough for users to send
    // a signal:
    int i = 0;
    
    for (;;) {
        if ((i++ % 50000000) == 0) {
            fprintf(stderr, ".");
        }
    }

    return 0;
}
```