## bitwise operation
- bitwise and:  `&`
- bitwise or: `|`
- bitwise exclusive or: `^`
	- exclusive or sometimes called conditional negation: 
		- if the first operation is a 1, then the result is the negation of the second operand
		- if the first operation is 0, the result is the second operand without being negated
```C
1 ^ 1 == 0
1 ^ 0 == 1
0 ^ 1 == 1
0 ^ 0 == 0
```

- bitwise negation: `~`
```C
~0 == 1
~1 == 0
```

## store bits in a variable
- gcc allows you to enter binary constants by prefacing the number with 0b.
- use hexadecimal constants prefaced with 0x.
```C
char a = 0b00010011;
unsigned char b = 0x14;
```


## shift operator
- shift operator:
	- `<<` shift left, `>>` shift right
		- think of them as arrows pointing in the direction of shift
	- the first operand, to the left of the operator is the value to shift
	- the second operand, to the right of the operator tells us how many places to shift
	- example
		- `1 << 3 == 0000 1000`

## Bit flags
Flag bits are commonly used by system calls, when a single argument is used to transmit data about multiple options. That variable is treated as an array of bits, where each bit represents an option -- or flag -- that can be turned on and off.

### how file permissions work in Linux
```
drwxr-xr-x
-rwxr-xr-x
```
- the leftmost dash in the permission string identifies the file type.
	- the dash means it is a regular file
	- d means which is a directory
- If you ignore the first dash that represents the file type, each file permission is essentially an on/off switch, so we can represent each one with a flag bit.

### flag bit
- We need nine bits to represent each permissions setting, so we need a variable with enough space for 9 bits. This rules out storing it in a byte.  The system calls that operate on file permissions use a `mode_t` type for the permissions string.
- example:
	- we defined it as an unsigned int, a 32-bit value: 
	- `0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0001 1110 1101`
	- which is corresponding to `r wxr- xr-x`

### `chmod` system call
- the arguments to `chmod` are the path to file we want to set permissions for, and the mode or permissions to set.
- these constants are defined in base 8, since one digit in base 8 is three binary digits.
	- `04 == 100`: read
	- `02 == 010`: write
	- `01 == 001`: execute
- the library defines constants for each possible permission
```C
#define S_IRUSR 0000400 /* R for owner */
#define S_IRGRP 0000040 /* R for group */
#define S_IROTH 0000004 /* R for other */
```
-  to generate a read-only permissions for a file
```C
mode_t mode = S_IRUSR | S_IRGRP | S_IROTH;
			= 0400 | 040 | 004
			= 0444
```
- given a mode variable, do the group or other users have read permissions?
```C
mode & (S_IGRP | S_IROTH)
```

## Bit vectors

#### bit masking
- we create a bit mask, a carefully constructed value where specific elements are set or not set
- and then applying the mask to set or unset those values.
- example: `
```C
unsigned short bit_array;
bit_array = 0000 0000 1010 1100;
bit_array = bit_array | (1 << 10);
// to remove 10 from the set
bit_array = bit_array & ~(1 << 10);
```