No matter how we order the read calls, we can't be guaranteed to not be waiting for one child while the other child has data ready for us to read. Thus, we derived select system call to avoid this situation.
## Select System Call
Select lets us specify a set of file descriptors and then blocks until at least one of them is ready for attention. Then select tells us which file descriptors are ready so we can avoid blocking on the non-ready ones.

```C
int select(int numfd, fd_set *read_fds, fd_set *write_fds, fd_set *error_fds, struct timeval *timeout);
```

### the second parameter `fd_set *read_fds`
the second parameter is the address of the set of descriptors from which the user wants to read
#### ready file descriptor
- Select blocks until one of these file descriptors has data to be read or until the resource has been closed. 
- In either case, file descriptor will not cause read to block.
- We will say that a file descriptor like this (with data or with a closed resource) is "ready".

#### select
- Select modifies the descriptor set so that when it returns, the set only contains the file descriptors that are ready for reading. 
- It might be the case that more than one file descriptor is ready when select returns.

#### file descriptor set
- the second parameter of select `read_fds` is a set of descriptors, we need to declare and initialise this set before calling select
- we declare a variable of type `fd_set`. An fdset is implemented as a bit field stored in an array of integers.
```C
fd_set read_fds;
FD_ZERO(&read_fds);
FD_SET(pipe_child1[0], &read_fds);
FD_SET(pipe_child2[0], &read_fds);
```
- macro `FD_ZERO` initializes the set of descriptors to be empty
- macro `FD_SET` add the file descriptors for the read ends of the two pipes into the formerly-empty set.

###  the first parameter  of select, `numfd`
- set `numfd` to be the value of the highest file descriptor in your descriptor set *plus one*.
- Select can be implemented more efficiently if we specify that our set can only contains file descriptors between 0 and `numfd - 1`.
- example
```C
int numfd;
if (pipe_child1[0] > pipe_child2[0]){
	numfd = pipe_child1[0] + 1;
} else {
	numfd = pipe_child2[0] + 1;
}
```


###  `FD_ISSET` - how does the call send a response back to us?
#### error checking
```C
if (select(numfd, &read_fds, NULL, NULL, NULL) != 1){
	perror("select");
	exit(1);
}
```
- we used the return value only for error checking
- it is set to the number of file descriptors that are ready

#### `&read_fds`
- Notice that we send the address of the file descriptor sets to select
- When select does finally return, the descriptor set `read_fds` will ONLY contain the file descriptors that are ready.

#### `FD_ISSET`
```C
FD_ISSET(pipe_child[0], &read_fds);
```
- we need to use another set operation, checking set membership to determine which descriptors remain in the set
- the macro `FD_ISSET` takes a single fd and returns whether or not it is in the fd set pointed to by the second parameter.
- if it is in the set, we know that this pipe is ready, so we can read from it without fear of blocking

### other parameters
- Like the second parameter, the third and fourth are also file descriptor sets.
	- You can use these sets to check which file descriptors are ready for writing or have error conditions pending, respectively.
- The final parameter is a pointer to struct timeval.
	- You can use it to set a time limit on how long select will block before returning (even if no file descriptors are ready.)


### Note
- `read_fds` is modified by select, so we can't just use it again in a second select call. 
- If we want to read from our pipes multiple times, in a loop, we'll need to re-initialize the set.