## Definition
1. protocol: Each machine has an internet protocol, or IP address: an address that can be used to send a message to it from any other machine that is connected to the internet.
2. ports: 
	- messages sent across the internet are destined for a particular program. so we need more than just the machine to specify which program, that is what ports for.
	- If a machine's address is like a street address, then a port is like an apartment number in the building at that address.
3. packets: messages sent from one machine are enclosed in packets. you can think of them as packages. They contain both the address and a payload -- the contents of the packet.
4. router: 
	- when the packet leaves the machine, it is received by another device, called **router**, that facilitates transfer of packets between networks.
	- Routers are connected to multiple networks and know which network the packet should be sent to in order to get it closer to its final destination.
5. server: a server is a program running on a specific port of a certain machine waiting for another program (or maybe many other program) to send a message.
	- many common services have defined ports:
		- web pages are typically served on port 80
		- secure web pages use port 443
6. client: A user runs a client program when they want to start interacting with a server. The client program sends the initial message
7. sockets: we use sockets to establish a communication channel
	- there are a few different types of sockets, and they different types all rely on the same system calls.
	- stream socket: build on the TCP protocol.
		- connection-oriented
		- no loss guaranteed
		- in-order delivery
	- datagram socket
	- domain socket
## socket system call
```C
int socket(int domain, int type, int protocol);
```
1. endpoint:
	- This system call is used to create an endpoint for communication. 
	- When we ultimately get everything set up, we will need one endpoint in the client program and one endpoint in the server. 
	- So both programs will independently invoke this system call.
2. the return value is type int. 
	- It will be -1 if there is an error
	- on success, it will be the index of an entry in the file-descriptor table
3. the first parameter domain:
	- domain set the protocol (or set of rules) used for communication
	- you can either set it to be the defined constant `PF_INET` or `AF_INET`
	- historically, these two constants are defined the same in socket.h
4. the second parameter type:
	- in this case, we will set it `SOCK_STREAM`
5. the third parameter protocol:
	- the parameter configures which protocol the socket will use for communication
	- stream sockets use the TCP protocol
	- in this case, we could set third parameter to be 0 (which tells the socket system call to use the default protocol for this type of socket)